---
layout: post
title: Git basics
---
## Installation
(provided you're using the APT package manager, like the default on Debian/Ubuntu)
```ssh
$sudo apt-get install git git-extras
```
## Clone a git repositoyr
```ssh
$git clone http://adress_to_repo
```
Update and merge by
```
$git pull
```
## Create a git repository
cd into the directory you wish to create a repository for. Then initialize a git-repository by
```ssh
$git init
```
Now, go to [Github](https://github.com/) and create a repository for the project. (First you need to create an account on github if you don't have it, and log in)
/images/git1.png
Click on start object and fill out the form you are linked to, i.e. repository name, and optional description. Then click 'Create repository' /images/cloneordownload.png
Copy the link which show up. Go back to the terminal and and paste the link in the git command below
```ssh
$git remote add origin https://github.com/your/link.git
```
We have now told the local repository where its remote origin is. Note that 'origin' is just an alias for your repository name. 

## Configure repository
Configure user accout with the config command
```ssh
$git config --global user.name "youre_git_username"
$git config --global user.email adress@email.com
```

## Set upstream branch
You can tell your local repository which is the upstream branch by doing an initial pull(i.e. download the files from the remote repository. Right now there is probably none or just a README.md file)
```ssh
$git pull origin master
```
 Then set upstream.
 ```$
 git branch --set-upstream-to=origin/master
 ```

## Push files to remote repository
If you add or edit files in your project and want to push to your remote repository you first need to add the files to the tracker
```ssh
$git add -A
```
The flag -A means adding all files. You can choose a specific file by entering the file name instead. Then you need to commit the changes and write a short message(not more than about 140 characters) describing the changes
```ssh
$git commit -m "This is the description message"
```
Finally push to the remote repository  
```ssh
$git push
```
(and enter username and password)
If we had not set the upstream we would need to enter
```ssh
$git push origin master
```
## Create a local branch
One of the wonderful things with a version control tool like git is to be able to have different branches (version) of the project. To branch a new copy of the project localy
```ssh
$git branch name-of-mynewbranch
```

## Switch local branch
To switch between local branches use
```ssh
$git checkout branchname
```
Commit to the new branch as usual.
```ssh
$git add -A
$git commit  -m "Saving to a another branch"
```
## List branches
### Local branches
```ssh
$git branch
```
### All branches
```ssh
$git branch -a
```
Use the flag -r for listing only remote, -l for only local.

## Switch local branch
To switch between local branches use
```ssh
$git checkout branchname
```

## Push new branch to remote repository
To push a new branch to the remote repository 
```ssh
$git push --set-upstream origin newbranchname
```
This will push the currently checkout out local branch

## Setting your local branch to exactly match remote branch

```ssh
$git fetch origin
$git reset --hard origin/master
```

## Go to particular revision
If you want to checkout a specific version you first need the SHA-1 hash of that commit. You can review the commits by
```ssh
$git log
```
You can also get a graphical view of the project with
```ssh
$gitk --all
```
Now checkout the particular revision by
```ssh
$git checkout <sha1>
```
Note that you don't need to provide the whole hash. The first four characters is an enough, as long as it is unambiguous.


## Pull specific directory from git repository
First create a directory where you want you local repository. cd into that directory. Initilize a git repo
```ssh
$git init
$git remote add origin https://github.com/theproject/adress.git
```
Fetch project
```ssh
$git fetch origin
```
Extract the direcotry
```ssh
$git checkout origin/master -- relative/path/to/file/or/dir
```
Note that you of course can choose any branch in the line above and not just 'master'.
