# Git basics

## Installation
(provided you're using the APT package manager, like the default on Debian/Ubuntu)
```ssh
$sudo apt-get install git git-extras
```
## Create a git repository
cd into the directory you wish to create a repository for. Then initialize a git-repository by
```ssh
$git init
```
Now, go to [Github](https://github.com/) and create a repository for the project. (First you need to create an account on github if you don't have it, and log in)
/images/git1.png
Click on start object and fill out the form you are linked to, i.e. Repository name, and optional Description. Then click no 'Create repository' /images/cloneordownload.png
Copy the link which show up. Go back to the terminal and and paste the link in the git command below
```ssh
$git remote add origin https://github.com/your/link.git
```
We have now told the lokal repository where its remote origin is. Note that 'origin' is just an alias for your repository name. 

## Configure repository
Configure user accout with the config command
```ssh
$git config --global user.name "youre_git_username"
$git config --global user.email adress@email.com
```

## Set upstream branch
You can tell your local repository which is the upstream branch by doing an initial pull(i.e. download the files from the remote repository. Right now there is probably none or just a README.md file)
```ssh
$git pull origin master
```
 Then set upstream.
 ```$
 git branch --set-upstream-to=origin/master
 ```

## Push files to remote repository
If you add or edit files in your project and want to push to your remote repository you first need to add the files to the tracker
```ssh
$git add -A
```
The flag -A means adding all files. You can choose a specific file by entering the file name instead. Then you need to commit the changes and write a short message(not more than about 140 characters) describing the changes
```ssh
$git commit -m "This is the description message"
```
Finally push to the remote repository  
```ssh
$git push
```
(and enter username and password)
If we had not set the upstream we would need to enter
```ssh
$git push origin master
```
## Create a local branch
One of the wonderful things with a version control tool like git is to be able to have different branches (version) of the project. To branch a new copy of the project localy
```ssh
$git branch name-of-mynewbranch
```
Now you can do changes that does not affect the master branch(or other branches of course). Save changes as usual by
```ssh
$git add -A
$git commit  -m "Saving to a new branch"
```
## List branches
### Local branches
```ssh
$git branch
```
### All branches
```ssh
$git branch -a
```
Use the flag -r for listing only remote, -l for only local.

## Switch local branch
To switch between local branches use
```ssh
$git checkout branchname
```

## Push new branch to remote repository
To push a new branch to the remote repository 
```ssh
$git push --set-upstream origin newbranchname
```
This will push the currently checkout out local branch

## Setting your local branch to exactly match remote branch

```ssh
$git fetch origin
$git reset --hard origin/master
```

## Go to particular revision
If you want to checkout a specific version you first need the SHA-1 hash of that commit. You can review the commits by
```ssh
$git log
```
You can also get a graphical view of the project with
```ssh
$gitk --all
```
Now checkout the particular revision by
```ssh
$ssh checkout <sha1>
```
Note that you don't need to provide the whole hash. The first four characters is an enough, as long as it is unambiguous.


## Pulling specific directory from git repository
First create a directory where you want you local repository. cd into that directory. Initilize a git repo
```ssh
$git init
$git remote add origin https://github.com/theproject/adress.git
```
Fetch project
```ssh
$git fetch origin
```
Extract the direcotry
```ssh
$git checkout origin/master -- relative/path/to/file/or/dir
```
Note that you of course can choose any branch in the line above and not just master.


## Creating a private git repository on a raspberry pi
### Remote system
You can ssh to you rasberry and do the following.
 1. Add user. Here we add user 'git' but you can call it something else ```sudo adduser git```. Note that this is not a git command but you add a new user to your raspberry pi.
 2. Logout and login as 'git' (or your choosen name). 
 3. Create a directory for your repository. It is custom to end the directory name with .git e.g. ```mkdir /home/git/my-repo.git```
 4. cd into this directory (my-repol.git) and initialize the repository ``` git init --bare ```
There you go. Now you have setup your remote system. Note that the 'bare' repo differs from your lokal repository. For example, you can't list your files as usual (with the ls command). Instead list your files in the directory with ```git ls-tree HEAD ```. You can add options. See options by typing ```git ls-tree```.
### Local system
 1. Initialize a local git repository in the folder of your projekt by ```git init```
 2. Create link: ```git remote add pi git@XXX.XXX.XXX.XXX:/home/git/my-repo.git (or your choosen directory name).This creates a new remote named pi (you can choose whatever)
 3. Add files to your local repository: ```git add -A```
 4. Commit fiels: ```git commit -m 'my first commit'
 5. Push to remote repository: git push pi master.
You can update you local repository if you have a newer version on the remote repo with ```git pull pi master```.
If you want to download the repository to a new computer (or perhaps foler): ```git clone git@XXX.XXX.XXX.XXX:/home/git/my-repo.git```
## Graphical userinterface
Start gui with ```git gui```
